Welcome to the world of
engineering management.
It is wonderful, or you'll see why
it's wonderful, or hard, or both.
Either way, at the end of this course,
you will appreciate a lot
about engineering management.
This course is Engineering Management 101.
It is very, very, very much an intro
course to engineering management.
Tomorrow, we're teaching about
Engineering Management 102.
That'll be taught by my colleague and
good peer, Ryan Burgess.
We'll talk a little bit more about that.
So my name is Jem, as you probably know.
I am a software engineering manager.
I currently work at Netflix, and I've been
a manager for about two and a half years,
which is why I was prompted to teach
a course on engineering management 101.
Because I still remember the pain
of transitioning, and I'm not yet
a grizzled and surly from years and
years of engineering management.
Or I'm like, this stuff is easy, because
it's not, it's not easy at all, and
I still remember that.
So I'm at the right stage where
I wanna teach a course on it.
You can find me on Twitter at @jemyoung.
I don't tweet a lot.
Sorry, X, Twitter.
>> [LAUGH]
>> Someday one of my
kids is gonna call me out on, its X, dad.
I'm on LinkedIn at Jem Young.
Again, I don't post a lot,
I probably should.
Throughout the course, you'll hear
snippets from my colleague and friend and
fellow engineering manager,
Ryan Burgess, and
he'll be teaching a course later
on Engineering Management 102.
And both of us, we have a podcast, Front
End Happy Hour, if you've heard of it,
anybody heard of it?
All right, a couple of people.
Yes, the front end masters crew
is waving their hands as well.
>> [LAUGH]
>> It's one of
the longest running tech
podcasts that we've done.
Ryan's definitely spearheaded that
whole effort, but it's a good time.
It's just a lighthearted take on tech,
and a picture a bunch of friends at a bar
or a party just talking about technology.
I have a few other courses.
I have one for interviewing for
front-end engineers.
Back when I was a software engineer,
I worked on front-end.
So I wrote a course on that
because interviewing is hard.
We haven't made it better over the years,
despite my best efforts of this course.
But hopefully, if more people watch it,
you'll be like, yeah,
we should probably make interviewing for
other people a little bit better.
I have another course, Full Stack for
Front-Ends, and that's where we dive into.
I'm a front-end engineer, but I don't
know anything about what happens beyond
the wall of APIs and things like that.
And we dive into that
in that course as well.
And probably one of the my
favorite courses to teach.
So in Practical Engineering Management
101, we're gonna cover three basic things.
The path.
How do you become a manager?
What does that look like?
It looks different for
everybody, very surprisingly.
We're gonna dive into
understanding the actual role.
Something that's really misunderstood
about engineering management and
being in charge of things.
I'll give you a sneak peek.
You're not in charge of anything.
You're in charge of probably less than
you've ever been in your life, and
it's a really different feeling.
And then we're gonna talking about
surviving the first days and
early tips of that transition from
software engineer to manager.
So the goals of this course are I
want people to build the skills and
knowledge to understand
engineering management.
Even if you say, you know what,
maybe engineering management isn't for
me by the end of the course.
That's fine.
If you understand the lessons here, you
will become a better software engineer.
Which always throws people.
What does engineering management have
to do with software engineering?
A quick question.
How many of you out there have
an engineering manager or a manager?
Yeah, most people almost everywhere in
the world has someone they report to.
They may not have the title of
maybe engineering manager But
you're reporting to somebody.
The President reports to the people,
the CEO reports to the shareholders,
everybody reports to somebody.
So as software engineers or
even engineering managers,
if you can understand the role of kind
of what what your manager is doing,
you will become better.
You'll be able to say,
I know what information they want.
I know what things
they're struggling with.
I know how to have a growth
conversation with them.
I know how to navigate
kind of just the ups and
downs of the business, and
that's really my intent.
Even if you don't become an engineering
manager at the end of this course,
or you're not sold on it
by the end of this course.
And I want to shine a light on the hidden
work of engineering management.
As a software engineer,
I had no idea what my manager did.
I saw them in one-on-ones.
I saw them in team meetings,
stand up project meetings, in the hallway,
maybe at lunch, but that was it.
I had no idea what they did with their
time other than they did something because
their calendar was always full.
So I wanna shine more light
onto what managers actually do.
Because it's surprising how
little we know about that.
I certainly didn't.
If you do want to become
an engineering manager,
I wanna provide tools to help
you transition those early days.
The transition is difficult.
It's difficult in unexpected ways,
in ways that until you do it,
you just really won't understand.
It's a lot like being a parent.
I don't know if any of you are parents,
but those of you who are know that
all the books and all the training and
all the advice and movies and
all that mean nothing when you're actually
holding your baby for the first time.
And that's a lot like
engineering management.
You can read as much as you want,
but until you do it,
you won't fully appreciate and
understand how difficult it is.
So I wanna help you with that.
I wanna give you tools to make
that a little bit easier.
Then I wanna provide some insights
in just common situations.
It's literally impossible to
cover every single scenario and
every single situation
you're gonna encounter.
And that's the joy of
engineering management.
It's always different from company
to company, from person to person,
from team to team, but
there are common overall scenarios
that you're probably gonna run into.
And I wanna give you some tools and
give you insights into,
maybe not how to solve them, but
at least give you some insights into,
here's how I would think about it, here's
how maybe you should think about it.
And odds are we probably have different
ways of solving problems, and that's okay.
That's the challenge and the pros and
cons of engineering management.
There is no one way to do things.
Yes,
>> I'll just read a couple lines
from chat.
The transition can be so brutal.
My transition was very tough.
There's no structure or model to follow.
Adam says, isn't it all about
filling up your calendar?
>> [LAUGH]
>> Yeah,
talking about different
stakeholder needs and
that my team needs that results
in a big organization mess and
unraveling it to make sure that
we're all facing the same direction.
And then someone said hurting cats.
>> [LAUGH] That's a good
way of putting it, and
I have a whole section
dedicated to meetings.
And not because I love meetings,
it's more, well, I'll talk about it then.
But yeah, I definitely talk about
meetings, the primary tool for
engineering managers,
kind of how you spend your time.
This course is a little different.
There's no code, obviously.
Or maybe not obviously,
there's no code in this course,
there are exercises we're
gonna walk through.
Some we'll do together,
some you'll do on your own.
And that's more just to build
up your competencies and
kind of help you understand yourself when
it comes to these challenging situations.
There are scenarios we're
gonna play out in real-time,
which should be pretty interesting.
Then we have an ask a manager question,
and
that's where I'll be talking
to my colleague, Ryan Burgess.
Ryan is a senior engineering
manager with lots of experience.
So he provides a very different
perspective than I do as more of
an early manager.
So, let's start with the origin
story of how I became a manager.
Before we dive into that,
some prerequisites.
For this course,
I think it's really helpful to have at
least three years' experience
as a software engineer.
I generally recommend a little
bit more if you're thinking about
transitioning into management, and
we'll talk about that why in a bit.
But I think if you're still
early in your career and
you're hearing all about engineering
management, you might get overwhelmed.
I really encourage people early
in their career, focus on coding.
Focus on that beauty, the frustration,
those long nights of
solving hard problems.
Because that sometimes goes away later in
your career as you think differently about
the business.
So enjoy it now.
I don't think you should focus too much
on the management side of things, but
you're welcome to.
It's just my recommendation.
And you have to have a willingness
to learn new things.
These will be different skills,
things that you're like, this is silly.
Why are we talking about this?
This has nothing to do with coding.
But it does, it's all about
coding at the end of the day, but
it's also not about coding at all.
I know, that's some cryptic wisdom there.
Everybody who's an engineering manager is
like, yep, and people who aren't are like,
that doesn't mean anything.
By the end, it'll make for more sense.
And this course is really for
software engineers who, again,
want that insight into
engineering management.
And they wanna say,
what does my manager do besides meetings?
And it's also for engineering managers.
If you want a different perspective
on engineering management,
we all are coming from a different place.
We all have different teams,
different cultures, different backgrounds.
So I wanna share some of my perspective,
and
mine is definitely more from
the bigger enterprise side of things.
So yours might be a little bit different,
but maybe you can pick something up and
hopefully I can learn from
you too with the questions.
So I could do the traditional,
what is it, valedictorian speech.
Webster dictionary defines manage as,
but I like this definition.
To be in control or in charge of
a business team or organization,
land, sure, that's about right.
The second one always speaks to me,
to succeed in doing something,
especially something difficult.
I managed to overcome something.
I managed to do this.
I managed to do that.
And that's, to me,
the heart of engineering management.
It is difficult, but
when you succeed, it is so
fulfilling in a way that is impossible to
describe unless you've done it before.
And hopefully I can share some of that.
A lot I'll focus on the realities
of engineering management,
why it's difficult, but don't let
it taken away, I enjoy what I do.
It's a very challenging, fulfilling job.
So, let's talk about how I became
a manager, because the path for
everybody is a little bit different and
mine is, I think an interesting story, but
I'm an interesting person,
if I do say so myself.
2016, there I was,
a fresh, young, Jem Young,
engineering manager or software engineer,
wasn't quite a manager yet.
I just got my first role and
it was at Netflix.
So I moved from New York all the way
to the Bay Area in California.
And they're a software engineer
working on the homepage, Netflix.com,
I was working as a,
I started as a front end engineer.
And I thought I knew a lot back then.
I knew very little,
I was very, very excitable.
We're gonna change the world,
you remember your engineering job.
You're like, yeah,
we're gonna be rich, stock options,
my company's only gonna go up,
this line of code I'm writing is critical.
Everything's gonna be different.
Everything's gonna be better.
So fast forward a few years, I've been
working at Netflix for four years at this
point, and I noticed something really,
really weird, really uncomfortable.
So I noticed my GitHub contributions, this
is a graph of my GitHub contributions,
they were going down, and down and
down, and I was perplexed.
I said, I'm an engineer,
I'm a software engineer.
What am I doing though?
If I'm not writing code, what am I doing?
And it really threw me for a loop
because I base my entire identity off of
being a software engineer and writing
code and my technical expertise, but
I was still doing something for
the company.
They hadn't let me go,
I was doing well by all metrics, but
I wasn't writing code anymore.
This really made me think about, what
is software engineering at this point?
I'm leading meetings now.
I'm running projects.
I'm throwing out ideas.
I'm helping.
I'm delegating work.
I'm helping people write code or
explaining technology to people.
How am I still a software engineer?
I'm not even touching code anymore.
It's going down and down and down.
This really gave me a lot to think about.
So fortunately, I have a really good
support group of friends who are like,
Jem, maybe you should try
engineering management.
I was like, [LAUGH] no thank you,
that doesn't seem very exciting to me.
They're like, why don't you try it?
You're pretty good with people, so people
tell me, and you know if nothing else.
And this is how I got tricked
into Netflix and interviewing for
Netflix was, you know what, if it doesn't
work out, you learned something and
you can go back to what
you were doing before.
I was like, yeah, that's true.
Now I know that's not the case.
You shouldn't casually become
an engineering manager.
The blast radius is high if
you're not committed to it, and
you can impact the real lives of people.
But at the time I was like, yeah, I'll try
it, what's the worst that could happen?
So in 2021,
I became an engineering manager.
And we'll talk more about that
transition and why it is difficult.
It is not easy to become
an engineering manager.
There are ways that are a little
bit easier than others, but
making that jump was really,
really difficult.
So as an engineering manager, and it was
2021 and I'll be honest, I was struggling.
I was struggling.
No one was telling me what to do.
The culture of the company is very much,
you're smart, we hired you for a role,
you figure it out.
Which I appreciate as a software engineer.
But as engineering manager, I had no idea.
What should I be focusing on?
There's so many problems and
there's so many ways I could be spending
my time, what should I be doing?
And the challenge of management
is no one can tell you that.
People can give you insights,
they can give you some tips,
maybe their perspective, but
no one can tell you what to do.
And that's kind of the pro and
con of engineering management.
No one tells you what to do.
In my first year, it was bad.
It was really bad.
I was in a really bad place.
And I had to figure out how to
get myself out of the hole.
And fortunately, I had friends I can
count on, give me good advice, but
overall, I don't like to quit and
I like the challenge.
And if something's hard that I
especially like when I overcome it.
But I pushed really hard and
I'd say this is something I don't
want anybody to go through though.
And that's kind of the onus for
this course is like,
I don't want you to
struggle the way I did.
And so you look at me,
I'm smiling now, the team is good.
I can look back in 2023 and say,
wow, I really made a difference.
I really turned things around from a team
that probably wasn't doing so well.
But I can only see that now, but
when you're in the thick of it,
you can't see it.
All you can see is the problems.
So, that's the origin story
of how I became a manager and
how I'm standing up here now.
And all of that I wanna teach you.
I wanna teach you how to avoid what I did.
I wanna teach you how to become
a manager the right way.
I wanna teach you all these skills and
just lessons I've learned, very,
very hard won lessons as a manager.
Why the practical part?
Why practical?
It's practical because there's so
many books on engineering management,
there's so many books on leadership.
A lot of them are, I remember
reading them, they're philosophical.
I guess you're like, your team and
how do you build trust with your team?
And how do you think about that?
And, what are the different
personalities in your team?
And these are important things to know.
But that's not really my style of
learning.tell me real lessons,
tell me real tips that
I can take away today,
not theoretical things, because there's
just too many scenarios to cover well.
So this is why the course is called
Practical Engineering Management.
We're not gonna go into
thought leadership too much.
This is all gonna be real practical
things that you can take away today.
That will make sense to you whether you're
an engineering manager, software engineer,
a director.
And that's the goal of
the practical side of things.
Things you can actually take and
do something with.